1The use qualities of digital designs
Jonas Löwgren
complete draft 1.0, Oct 21, 2002
Interaction design is about creating conditions for good use of digital designs. But 
the only way to learn those conditions, to understand the relations between design 
choices and resulting use, is still largely by practice and apprenticeship. I propose to 
think about interaction design in terms of use qualities, i.e., certain properties of a 
digital design that are experienced in its use. Such qualities transcend the specifi  c 
design and offer a language in which to talk about desirable design outcomes. 
I present a map of some twenty proposed use qualities and discuss them in some 
detail.
INTRODUCTION
The nature of computing has changed over the last twenty or thirty years. 
More importantly, the use of computing has evolved accordingly. This is 
obvious but still deserves pointing out now and again. Whereas comput-
ers largely used to be tools for well-defi  ned business tasks, they are now 
used by most people for general knowledge work, social communication, 
entertainment, recreation, shopping, creative expression and so on. A 
crucial difference between then and now is that most use is discretionary. 
People choose to use a digital service or product if they want to; other-
wise not.
Interaction designers are concerned with creating conditions for good 
use. We do not know, however, what those conditions really are. One 
thing that should be clear from the above is that good use is not confi  ned 
to effi  cient and error-free performance of tasks with set goals.
In my own design work, I have been occupied at times with reasonably 
large sets of (somewhat) structured information. How could we imagine 
people drawing more value, benefi  t, meaning from such information 
spaces? And what can I contribute as an interaction designer? A few ex-
amples are Sens-A-Patch and the post-hoc worknotes project (Löwgren, 2001; 
Andersson et al., 2002; web-09).2As I developed concepts and prototypes, studied the empirical research 
around knowledge work, and explored the ideas of other designers work-
ing in the fi  eld, a certain use quality started to emerge as highly relevant 
to good use. Following the Pliant research group (web-08), I call it the 
quality of pliability. A set of information is pliable if it feels to the user 
like a responsive material. Inquiry, exploration and learning is a tight 
loop between senses, thought and action. I make a move – the informa-
tion, the material shapes and responds – I notice something – I make 
another move – and so on. 
Pliability is an example of a use quality that I propose as important for 
a certain class or genre of digital designs. At times, I have even claimed 
that there exist genre-essential use qualities, i.e, qualities that are neces-
sarily present in the use of all instances of digital designs belonging to the 
genre in question. Currently, I am prepared to back down a bit. After all, 
it is perfectly possible that there are examples of good use in, e.g., interac-
tive information spaces that are not pliable at all.
I do, however, stand by the idea of identifying important use quali-
ties. It is my fi  rm belief that attempts to articulate genres in digital design 
and their corresponding use qualities are quite valuable in bringing the 
fi  eld forward. First, they help practicing designers identify and move in 
relevant directions in the early phases of contact with a new design situ-
ation. Secondly, they help clarify the communication between designers 
and other stakeholders, primarily the clients. Thirdly, they provide a 
format for constructing transferable design knowledge and thus hint at 
one possible expression for a science of digital design.
IDENTIFYING USE QUALITIES 
OF DIGITAL DESIGNS
In the following, I identify a few use qualities of digital designs that I 
fi  nd important and possibly fruitful. They are grouped together in fi  ve 
clusters, as the fi  gure on next page shows.
Maps such as the one below always have a sense of fi  nality, as though 
they were the last word on the subject. However, I want to strongly em-
phasize the tentative nature of the work. It should be seen as a statement 
in an ongoing debate, where the goal is not to win the argument. The 
goal is rather the debate itself; to modify my initial proposal, question 
my choices and structures, and add new concepts is to contribute to the 
development of an amorphous body of knowledge that facilitates design 
and supports better use of digital designs.
I called the map a »statement«, not an »opening statement«. There is 
already a debate among designers, researchers, analysts and critics on the 
conditions for good use of digital designs. Unfortunately, it is quite scat-
tered across the academic literature, the trade press and the professional 
fora of digital design.
My work has consisted in pulling some of the threads together and 
relating them to each other. This is in itself a statement on what I have 3chosen to include and omit, and what structure I have chosen. A small 
part of the map is based on my own fi  rst-hand design experience, primar-
ily the notions of seductivity, pliability and social actability. I also have a 
fairly strong background in the mainstream of HCI which entails quali-
ties such as effi  ciency and transparency. The rest of the concepts draw on 
publicly available material such as other designers’ refl  ections, scientifi  c 
use studies and digital design critiques. I have introduced some of the 
labels, whereas others are from the original sources.
I will now go through the clusters one at a time, discussing each pro-
posed use quality in some detail. I then close with a more general discus-
sion of my approach and its implications.
The group on the left consists of qualities having to do with motivation.
playability . . . . . A game has high playability when the player says »Just one more time!« 
after game-over (Minter, 1997). The notion of playability is quite elusive 
and obviously very attractive, given that computer games is one of the few 
areas in digital design where the market »works« in the sense that con-
sumer preferences have economic effects. What I mean is that computer 
games are assessed among players and reviewed in trade magazines. Their 
playability (in the sense used here) is a strong factor in the overall judg-
ments formed by players and critics.
The literature on game play seems to suggest that playability is 
connected to the balance of goals, resources and obstacles in the game 
(see, e.g., Pearce, 1997). If the player can acquire the resources needed 
A MAP OF USE QUALITIES, 
WHICH I PROPOSE AS BEING 
IMPORTANT.4to overcome the obstacles and reach the goals, but only after signifi  cant 
struggles, then the challenge is right to foster playability. This also entails 
that a highly playable game should not avoid risks. In games based on 
character identifi  cation, the playability would presumably be less if there 
was no risk of failing. The struggle needed to reach the goals can certainly 
involve dying and starting over a few times.
My use of the term goals should not be taken in any ultimate sense. 
Quite to the contrary; a highly playable game has a progression of goals 
where a new one is introduced as the present one is reached. In adventure 
games, this progression is often connected with an unveiling or a new 
turn in the plot. Point-scoring games typically have the ever-progressing 
goal of beating the previous high score.
seductivity . . . . . A related quality is the seductivity of the use. In the words of Khaslavsky 
and Shedroff (1999), seduction is a process of enticement (grabbing atten-
tion and making an emotional promise), relationship (making progress 
with small fulfi  llments and more promises, possibly ongoing for a long 
time) and fulfi  llment (fulfi  lling the fi  nal promises and ending the experi-
ence in a memorable and positive way).
The example offered by Khaslavsky and Shedroff of a seductive digital 
design is the Visual Thesaurus by Plumb Design (web-10), a web applica-
tion that adds new dimensions on the well-known contents of a tradition-
al thesaurus by virtue of its interactive properties. 
•It delivers surprising novelty for most users.
•It goes beyond obvious needs and expectations. The traditional orga-
nization of a thesaurus is mainly an effect of the (paper) medium.
•It creates an emotional response due to its visual and interactional 
beauty.
•It connects to personal goals: the fascination of words and concepts 
(and thus: mind and thought).
•It promises to fulfi  ll those goals.
•It leads the casual viewer to discover deeper meanings of looking up 
a word: the multidimensional and dynamic relationships between 
concepts.
anticipation . . . . . Anticipation is a quality of use that has so far mainly been connected with 
dramatic structures and various forms of plot-driven interaction. Fujihata 
(2001) describes the interaction process as one of participation and imagi-
nation: »In an art of interactivity, one must be stimulated by interaction 
and enjoy having one’s imagination activated. Interactivity is a stimula-
tion of the power of imagination. By the power of imagination, one tries 
to see what will happen a few milliseconds ahead. This brings a future to 
the present. It is a bridge between a past and a future. Only interactivity 
can make such a jump, enabling us to escape from the chronological cage. 
I believe it is a real creation.«
relevance, usefulness . . . . The heritage of work-oriented digital design has brought with it mo-
tivational use qualities such as relevance and usefulness. When we call 
something relevant, and even more so when we call something useful, we 
THE VISUAL THESAURUS.5always need to orient to a purpose: useful for what? The traditional an-
swer is concerned with work tasks. If a system offers the information and 
tools you need to perform a task, then it is a useful and relevant system. 
The connections to modernist notions such as fi  tness for purpose should 
be obvious.
Even though the concepts are typically used in reference to work tasks, 
it may be noted that the words in themselves do not preclude other ap-
plications. For instance, it seems quite sensible to talk about the relevance 
and usefulness of a web site dedicated to (hobby) fi  shing. But there are 
certainly some limits to these and other purpose-related qualities. As we 
move towards entertainment and aesthetic experiences, they seem to lose 
their signifi  cance. Is Tetris a relevant game? How useful is Osmose ?
The group of qualities in the middle have to do with the interaction, perhaps with 
the surfaces offered by the digital artifacts for handling and perception.
fl  uency . . . . . Digital media are increasingly infusing our environment, typically per-
ceptible although not always in the focus of our attention. The growing 
peripheral presence of digital designs highlights the need for fl  uency. Use 
is not necessarily on-or-off, full concentration or not at all. It is rather a 
fl  uent dance among multiple representations. Information streams move 
between center and periphery as we move through the shifting environ-
ments of everyday life and work. Transitions need to be graceful and 
nondisruptive.
As an example, consider Hazed Windows (web-05), a design con-
cept that was presented by a group of interaction design students at the 
Malmö University school of Arts and Communication in 2001. The topic 
of the project was Presence and the group had concentrated on light-
weight, peripheral social communication. The affective state they sought 
is somehow related to the thoughts of a child who draws a picture for 
grandmother without necessarily going through with the bigger com-
mitment of actually talking her parents into mailing the drawing. The 
design is inspired by drawing in the mist on a window: you make marks 
on a digital surface that is connected to other surfaces somewhere (at the 
grandmother’s house, for instance). Your marks show up on the other 
surface as well. The point is that the marks fade away gradually over time, 
disappearing completely after a few hours. This technically simple feature 
makes the whole communication situation different, starts from a fresh 
set of assumptions regarding digital media, creates conditions for fl  uent 
use.
autonomy . . . . . The autonomy of a digital design has a strong infl  uence on how it is 
handled and perceived. A strongly autonomous design, an agent, is an 
artifact that acts on its own in the world defi  ned by the symbols accessible 
to it. It maintains its own goals, chooses its own means and can be said on 
some sense to have a will of its own. To the user, an agent is an actor who 
can be more or less collaborative.
It used to be interesting to anthropomorphize agents, that is, to de-
sign them with human traits or qualities. The Knowledge Navigator future 6scenario from Apple in 1987 features Phil, the intelligent desktop agent, 
who looks like a clever young man with a white shirt and bowtie. The 
user (a university professor) instructs him in spoken language to perform 
tasks such as answering the phone and fi  nding all relevant unread articles 
for preparing a talk. A more recent example is the »help« function in 
Microsoft Offi  ce .
On the other end of the spectrum, purely non-autonomous designs are 
tool-like in their character. The user wields the tool to process materials 
and refi  ne them to work products. The tool is an extension of the hand or 
the eye; an instrument that facilitates or enables certain actions, strictly 
under user control.
The interesting parts of the spectrum are, of course, between the 
two extremes. Virtual spaces are increasingly being used as habitats for 
a-life (artifi  cal life) creatures where the user/visitor can affect the course 
of events to some extent. In some worlds, the user constructs her own 
creature and then returns to learn how it has developed. An example is 
The bush soul by Rebecca Allen (web-03); artists such as Christa Sommerer 
and Jane Prophet have also presented work of this kind.
The genres of God-games and Sim-games can also be considered in 
terms of autonomy. An overall epic or a world simulation run autono-
mously on a long-term timescale, whereas the player modifi  es local condi-
tions and hopefully the general development of the gameworld by her 
actions. Are such virtual spaces and games autonomous or not? Clearly, 
they occupy places somewhere between the pure agent and the pure tool.
Autonomy and fl  uency interact in an in-
teresting way in the installation Riding the Net 
(Sommerer et al., 2001). The idea is that an 
ongoing face-to-face conversation is captured 
and analyzed by a system. The system recogniz-
es a word in the conversation, sends a request 
for a Web image search based on the word, 
and then presents the returned images fl  oating 
across a large display placed peripherally to the 
conversation participants. If the participants do 
nothing, the images simply fl  oat by and disap-
pear. However, if a particular image catches a 
participant’s eye, she can reach out and touch 
the display to hold the image still for a while. 
One may easily imagine providing a more detailed view, richer informa-
tion and perhaps spawning a more focused search by, e.g., a tap on the 
held image.
Apart from being an installation of digital art, Riding the Net can be 
seen as a concept for less intrusive collaboration support. In that perspec-
tive, the relative autonomy of the system in selecting search criteria and 
fl  oating the images past the participants is signifi  cantly higher than for 
most collaboration support systems coming out of cscw and hci tradi-
tions. Riding the Net thus becomes more peripheral in a context of collabo-
ration, and perhaps appropriately so.
RIDING THE NET.7pliability . . . . . A set of information is pliable to the user if it feels like a responsive mate-
rial; a matter of inquiry that can be manipulated in an almost tactile 
sense; a highly involved process of exploration where the loop between 
senses, thought and action is very tight and rapid. I make a move – the 
material shapes and responds – I notice something new – I make another 
move – and so on. Ahlberg et al. (1992) discuss a similar quality in their 
concept of dynamic queries, and call it tight coupling.
On a superfi  cial level, I attempted 
to explore the notion of pliability in 
the design of the Sens-A-Patch inter-
action technique for navigation of 
moderately sized information spaces 
(Löwgren, 2001). It is based on the 
idea of spatial constancy – informa-
tion elements stay in the same place 
on the navigation surface through a 
session and across sessions. In order 
to fi  t many elements onto a small 
surface, the presentation is based 
on overlapping clusters, on of which 
is active at a time and the rest are 
visually faded into the background 
(but still legible). The user experi-
ence indeed seems to create a certain 
amount of involvement, at least visual interest. In one case when Sens-
A-Patch was used to present all the contents of a web site, some users 
reported staying on the fi  rst page longer than their information demands 
required, in order to play with the sensation of navigating the surface.
As we move beyond the surface, pliability as opposed to rigidity is 
a possible direction in many fi  elds of administrative data processing 
(Henderson & Harris, 2000; web-08). It is often the case that the use is 
unnecessarily constrained and structured merely because of the underly-
ing database structures used for implementation. It is quite feasible to 
work in the direction of more free-form data, basing disambiguation and 
other technical needs instead on social mechanisms. A simple example 
is the rediscovery of the margins of paper forms, where annotations can 
be made and tied to the appropriate context (the form itself) for future 
interpretation. Most existing databases could easily be augmented with 
free-form fi  elds similar to the margin.
immersion . . . . . At the focus of our attention, handling and perception can become im-
mersive. Digital design offers possibilities for quasi-physical immersion 
by means of virtual reality technologies. The idea is to fi  ll our sensory 
organs as much as possible with the »virtual world« and the canonical 
example is, of course, Osmose by Char Davies (web-07). In addition to 
visual and auditory immersion, the most powerful immersive effect in 
Osmose comes from exploiting our kinaesthetic sense of body and mo-
tion. Moving around in the Osmose world is accomplished not by making 
artifi  cial gestures with datagloves, but rather by breathing in and out 
SLIDING ACROSS
A SENS-A-PATCH SURFACE.8and by shifting your body weight. Technically 
speaking, there is a sensor around the chest 
that is connected to your height above ground 
in the virtual world. You are standing on sen-
sors that are connected to speed and direction 
of travel. The experience of navigating through 
the profoundly bodily function of breathing, 
however, is not reducible to simple technical 
understandings.
As we all know, immersion does not require 
expensive equipment for sensory surround-
stimulation. There is another kind of immer-
sion that comes from engaging so deeply in the 
task at hand that the world around it ceases 
to exist. In terms of digital use experiences, it occurs sometimes when 
writing, drawing, surfi  ng the web. A slightly more passive but very real 
form of immersion comes from participating in or being told a captivat-
ing story. But the perhaps most immersive activity in the digital realm is 
programming, where complex structures are built in the delicate bal-
ance between the programming language constructs and the limits of 
the programmer’s mental capacity. The following quote by Alex McLean 
(web-04) should be familiar to many programmers although the specifi  c 
visualizations may differ widely.
Consider this mailing list post, part of a discussion about the »feel« of 
computer languages.
»I’ve always pictured programming as a dance of sorts, very slow 
and each gesture receives a great deal of attention, so that a limb or 
a step would not stray from a particular path. Loops look like pirou-
ettes to me, I/O feels like delicate gestures with one’s hands, no, just 
the  fi  ngertips drawing patterns in the air. Conditionals and cases are 
tumbles and jumps (into the air, that is). Arithmetic is kind of hazy, 
controlled slides with no traction (think ›slick moves‹), things being 
pushed and brushed aside.«
A program in execution is a program in motion. Control fl  ows 
around the program, taking data with it. Data fl  ows into the program, 
and is breathed out again. A hacker staring intently into her screen is 
probably turning somersaults in her mind.
The group of qualities to the right have to do with actions and their outcomes, on 
social levels rather than the handling and perception of surfaces themselves.
identity . . . . . Constructing and maintaining identity is central in the use of digital 
designs, which possess symbolic use qualities like any other designed ob-
jects. The culture recently growing up around skins for accessory desktop 
applications demonstrates our common desire to project just the right im-
age. Translucent covers in vaguely organic shapes have been fi  tted onto all 
available computing peripherals since the groundbreaking introduction of 
the iMac in 1998.
THE OAK TREE BY THE POND IN 
THE OSMOSE WORLD.9But the construction of identity runs deeper than merely picking 
the right skin (whether made of pixels or of plastic). The software of 
Kai Krause and colleagues at MetaCreations in the 90s, the best known 
examples perhaps being Kai’s Power Tools and Bryce , were mostly discussed 
in terms of their innovative interfaces. However, the technical func-
tions offered by the software were far more important (albeit perhaps 
less noticeable). Fairly sophisticated image manipulation, 3d modelling 
and high-quality rendering were made accessible to a general audience 
and their desktop computers for the fi  rst time. The software focused on 
visual results, hiding much of the complexity behind a layer of skillfully 
designed abstraction. Users with no training or innate talent in the visual 
arts could produce stunning results quickly and with little effort – a sig-
nifi  cant contribution to the ongoing project of reconstructing your image 
of yourself.
actability . . . . . The extent to which a digital design empowers you to act is called (social) 
actability. We may think of it as a space of possible courses of action, 
shaped by many factors including the digital tools and media involved. 
Classic examples include the atm and the redefi  nition of the bank in 
everyday life, and the possible uses of anonymous conference boards for 
open-hearted discussions as well as for vicious personal attacks.
When we look at fi  ction and narrative settings, the corresponding use 
quality is typically called agency: the power to take actions with effects in 
the dramatic universe (Murray, 1997).
A slightly more elaborate example is Avatopia (Gislén & Löwgren, 
2002; web-02), an ongoing attempt to create a forum for nonviolent soci-
etal action among young teenagers in Sweden. Our design work has been 
driven mainly by the goal of creating good-enough conditions for societal 
action. In other words, it is an example of design for actability. Most of 
the major design decisions can be traced to this goal. For instance, the 
forum consists of an avatar world in interplay with a short daily maga-
zine on public-service tv: broad visibility is necessary for societal action. 
There is a rather innovative tool in the avatar world for collaborative cre-
ation of fi  lm: expressive tools for action, fi  tted to the medium of dissemi-
nation. A group of teenagers have participated in the design of Avatopia 
and will now move on to becoming beta-citizens as the avatar world is 
implemented: the world is inhabited by rerasonably experienced citizens 
already at public launch, hence the norms for action in Avatopia will be 
more or less in place (socially speaking).
fl  exibility . . . . . There is a tendency, not the least among designers, to think of digital 
designs as something that is fi  nalized in a development process and then 
deployed among the user community in its fi  nal shape. This is many 
times adequate and not at all strange, given the heritage of mass produc-
tion and specialization of the industrial age. But at the same time, it is a 
case of under-using the potentials of the digital material. The use quality 
of fl  exibility is becoming increasingly relevant and deserves some consid-
eration.
FROM THE AVATOPIA DEMO 
(WORK IN PROGRESS).10The canonical example here is, of course, the spreadsheet. Microsoft 
Excel and similar applications might seem like straightforward business 
tools for fi  nancial calculation, but in fact they are highly sophisticated 
programming environments. The programming paradigm is quite differ-
ent from what is normally thought of as programming languages, and it is 
apparently easy to learn and use for people without training in program-
ming. Millions of people are doing systems development every day when 
they construct spreadsheets with calculation formulae, for personal use or 
for the use of colleagues in the group or department. Most of these system 
developers have no formal training in systems development; many of the 
systems they develop continue to grow and evolve locally as the business 
needs change.
An increasing demand for fl  exibility can also be seen in the hacker 
communities and their public outlets in the form of open source projects, 
where design and use are closely linked in a never ending development 
process. The basic rules are that you are free to use any program you can 
fi  nd. If you don’t like it, you don’t fi  le complaints. Instead, you modify it 
according to your needs and give your modifi  cations back to the commu-
nity. This culture of freely sharing work and building upon the work of 
others can be found not only among programmers but also in, e.g., music, 
web design and the digital arts. The idea of extending it to mainstream 
application domains other than spreadsheet calculation is clearly appeal-
ing.
The group of qualities at the bottom of the map are mediations of structural 
 qualities, engineering ideals as refl  ected in use qualities.
effi  ciency, transparency The effi  ciency of using a digital design is typically connected to perform-
ing tasks with external purposes. Effi  cient use is rapid and error-free. The 
interface stands between the users and their tasks; ideally, the interface is 
transparent, such that the required operations can be carried out without 
distractions. The fi  eld known as human-computer interaction or hci is 
mainly oriented towards improving the effi  ciency of computer-supported 
tasks.
elegance . . . . . The (technical) elegance of a digital design is a combination of power 
and simplicity (Gelerntner, 1998). As a general aesthetic principle for 
engineering, an artifact should perform as well as possible with as simple 
a construction as possible. For programming, this translates to creating 
elements (modules, objects, subroutines, programs) that compute rapidly 
in few lines of source code. Note that simplicity is not a simple concept 
– a highly effi  cient and compact program can be almost impossible to 
understand for all but a few experts, still be considered an elegant piece of 
work.
functional minimalism . . The elegance = power + simplicity formula is often translated to the 
realm of use qualities, more or less consciously. The idea of functional 
minimalism can be seen as a reaction to the exploding number of fea-
tures in many mainstream applications: provide tools that do their core 11functions well and nothing else. 
The example presented by Shedroff 
(2001) is the Black Berry , a wireless 
pda strictly limited to the func-
tions of paging, email, notepad, and 
personal organizer.
When the concept of Magic 
Lenses was introduced by Xerox 
Parc in 1993 (web-06), the com-
bination of power and simplicity 
made the idea resonate with many 
people. A Magic Lens is basically 
a semi-transparent desktop tool 
that you can move over objects in 
a visual interface to get »behind 
the surface« of those objects. The 
fi  rst demos showed lenses that presented properties of graphics objects 
and made them available for editing; the concept has since been applied 
to various information visualization tasks. The power of the Magic Lens is 
in the generality of the concept and the ability to see all the way into the 
heart of the interface objects; the simplicity is in the immediately recog-
nizable operation.
Finally, the group of qualities at the top of the map have to do with creating a 
distance between the user and the digital design. Distancing as a design strategy 
is mainly found in critical art, although there is the occasional attempt to use 
distancing qualities analytically in understanding also work-oriented use. One 
example is Holmlid’s (2002) discussion of surprise and confusion as a complemen-
tary pair of aspects found in professional IT use.
surprise . . . . . When you use a digital design, it is surprising if it challenges your as-
sumptions. autoIllustrator by Adrian Ward (web-01) presents itself as a 
prototypical member of the productivity tool class, a vector drawing 
program that looks a lot like Adobe Illustrator and even has a similar name.
Once you start using it for drawing, however, you are constantly 
surprised. The tools in the palette are not quite like the draftsman’s tools 
you expect, but more playful and (perhaps) somewhat threatening. For 
example, there is a setting that distorts your shapes such that, e.g., if you 
try to draw a square it comes out as a children’s drawing of a house. The 
color palette reacts to your choice of color by calling you a sissy and sug-
gesting a really strong color instead. There are little creatures called bugs 
that walk around your drawing surface on their own, leaving ink in their 
trails. Your assumptions are challenged with respect to the autonomy, the 
toolness of the program.
parafunctionality . . . . . Dunne (1999, p.44) defi  nes parafunctionality as a form of design where 
function is used to encourage refl  ection on our relation to technology, 
or »how electronic products condition our behavior.« Using a parafunc-
tional object creates a heightened sense of distance, mainly because it is 
AUTO-ILLUSTRATOR IN USE.12conceptually diffi  cult to assimilate into your view of reality. To acknowl-
edge its usability is hence also to discover new ways of seeing (parts of) 
the world. It should be noted that some parafunctional designs cannot be 
(safely) used, such as the Intolerable Object by Philippe Ramette whose lens 
focuses sunlight onto the top of your head. Modelling a use scenario in 
your mind is in many cases enough to achieve the enstrangement moti-
vating the parafunctional design.
An example of parafunctionality in digital design, striking in its 
simplicity, is the atm competition proposal by Jeff Kipnis (cited in 
Dunne, ibid.): »People like to play lotto and people like to use the atm . 
Why don’t you make it an option in the atm to say put your card in and 
say, I’ll bet a little bit and see if I can get a little more out, so you ask for 
twenty dollars, and you push the button, and you could get twenty-fi  ve 
or you could get fi  fteen.« I would expect that most readers have never 
thought before about combining lottery and the atm , but once the idea is 
introduced it gives rise to all kinds of thoughts from atm use to the role 
of money in society and everyday life.
DISCUSSION
In the introduction, I claimed that the attempt to articulate use qualities 
of digital designs serves three purposes in bringing the fi  eld forward.
First, a vocabulary of such qualities can be helpful to practicing de-
signers in early phases of a development process. In the initial contacts 
with a design situation, not very much is fi  xed and any road forward 
might be equally fruitful (or fruitless). If one or a few desirable use quali-
ties can be identifi  ed, roughly on the level of abstraction illustrated here, 
the design process will more easily develop a sense of direction. As work 
proceeds through conceptual to more detailed phases, the desirable quali-
ties can be gradually refi  ned into more specifi  c goals.
From a hci point of view, the approach I hint at above is a possible 
answer to the commonly observed shortcoming of usability engineering: 
that it is impossible in most cases to specify measurable usability goals as 
early in the development process as the typical methodologies would have 
it. Similar ideas of starting with more abstract goals, then gradually refi  n-
ing them into a usability specifi  cation, have been advanced. An example 
is the notion of user experience goals suggested in the recent textbook by 
Preece et al. (2002).
The second purpose is in clarifying communication between design-
ers and other stakeholders, primarily the clients. Different techniques 
have been developed in the design disciplines to deal with this notoriously 
diffi  cult area, including the graphic-design practice of collecting and 
discussing examples sharing a »tone« that we want to reach also in the 
project at hand. Similarly, desirable use qualities can be communicated 
and clarifi  ed by means of examples early in a digital design process.
Finally, the role of research in digital design as in any other fi  eld is to 
construct and disseminate knowledge. If we assume that the development 
of digital systems is a design discipline, it follows that the forms of knowl-13edge produced by research must be aligned with the forms of knowledge 
used in design. It is my belief that the articulation of use qualities in digi-
tal designs can be a valid research contribution, provided that the results 
observe the usual criteria for scientifi  c knowledge production.
One specifi  c criterion deserves a short note: the use qualities thus 
articulated have to be transferable. This means that they are meaning-
ful outside the context in which they emanated and that enough data 
and sources are provided for the reader to critically assess the value of 
the constructs provided. As I hinted above, I believe that the articulation 
of use qualities such as the ones above are one half of the constitutive 
relationship in which a genre is constructed and maintained. Genres thus 
defi  ne the scopes of essential meaning for the articulated qualities. An 
over-simplifi  ed example of this argument would be the observation that 
playability has no meaning, or at least no place as a desirable quality, in 
the design of an industrial process supervision system. (Although it might 
have in the context of training the process operators, as opposed to the 
supervision and maintenance of the actual process.)
REFERENCES
Ahlberg, C., Williamson, C., Shneiderman, B. (1992). Dynamic queries 
for information exploration: An implementation and evaluation. Hu-
man Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ‘92 Proceedings) , pp. 619–626. 
New York: ACM Press.
Andersson, O., Cacciatore, E., Löwgren, J., Lundin, T. (forthcoming). 
Post-hoc worknotes: A concept demonstration of video content man-
agement. Video and paper to be presented at ACM Multimedia ‘02 .
Dunne, A. (1999). Hertzian tales: Electronic products, aesthetic experience and 
critical design. London: Royal College of Art.
Fujihata, M. (2001). Understanding the world. In Leopoldseder, H., 
Schopf, C. (eds.) Cyberarts 2001 , pp. 80–85. Wien: Springer-Verlag.
Gelerntner, D. (1998). Machine beauty: Elegance and the heart of technology. 
New York: Basic Books.
Gislén, Y., Löwgren, J. (2002). Avatopia: Planning a community for non-
violent societal action. Digital Creativity 13(1):23–37.
Henderson, A., Harris, J. (2000). Beyond formalism: The art and science 
of designing pliant systems. In Kaasgard, K. (ed.) Software design and 
usability.  Copenhagen: CBS Press.
Holmlid, S. (2002). Adapting users: Towards a theory of use quality. 
Linköping Studies in Science and Technology, dissertation no. 765, 
Linköping University, Sweden.
Khaslavsky, J., Shedroff, N. (1999). Understanding the seductive experi-
ence. Communications of the ACM 42(5):45–49.
Löwgren, J. (2001). Sens-A-Patch: Interactive visualization of label spac-
es. In Banissi, E. et al. (eds.) Proc. Fifth Int. Conf. Information Visualiza-
tion (IV2001) , pp. 7–12. Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society. 14Minter, J. (1997). Computer gaming’s new worlds. Computer Graphics
31(1):12–13.
Murray, J. (1997). Hamlet on the holodeck . Free Press.
Pearce, C. (1997). The interactive book. Indianapolis: MacMillan.
Preece, J., Rogers, Y., Sharp, H. (2002). Interaction design: Beyond human-
computer interaction. New York: John Wiley.
Shedroff, N. (2001). Experience design 1. Indianapolis: New Rider.
Sommerer, C., Mignonneau, L., Lopez-Gulliver, R. (2001). Riding the 
net. Proc. SIGGRAPH 2001 Conf. Abstracts and Applications , p. 133. New 
York: ACM Press.
Web sources
[web-01] autoIllustrator. Created by Adrian Ward.
www.auto-illustrator.com , last accessed Oct 9, 2002.
[web-02] Avatopia. Work in progress, 2000–02.
www.animationenshus.eksjo.se/Avatopia , last accessed Sep 23, 2002.
[web-03] The bush soul. Created by Rebecca Allen in 1997.
emergence.design.ucla.edu , last accessed Oct 9, 2002.
[web-04] Hacking sound in context. By Alex McLean. 
www.generative.net/papers/hacking/index.html , last accessed May 8, 
2002.
[web-05] Hazed windows. Design concept by Trine Freiesleben, Miska 
Knapek and Henrik Moberg in 2001.
webzone.k3.mah.se/kid01016/projekt_forskningstema.htm , last  accessed 
Oct 9, 2002.
[web-06] The mli project. Collection of papers on Magic Lenses by Eric 
Bier, Ken Fishkin, Ken Pier and Maureen Stone.
www2.parc.com/istl/projects/MagicLenses , last accessed Oct 9, 2002.
[web-07] Osmose. Created by Char Davies in 1995.
www.cyberstage.org/archive/cstage21/osmose21.html , last accessed Oct 21, 
2002.
[web-08] The Pliant research group.
www.pliant.org , last accessed Oct 9, 2002. www.pliant.org , last accessed Oct 9, 2002. www.pliant.org
[web-09] Post-hoc worknotes. Project intro and concept demo in Swed-
ish, full reports in English. Created in 2001–02.
www.animationenshus.eksjo.se/phwn , last accessed Oct 9, 2002.
[web-10] Visual thesaurus. By Plumb Design.
www.plumbdesign.com/thesaurus , last accessed Sep 23, 2002.